\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename libidn2.info
@include version.texi
@settitle Libidn2 @value{VERSION}
@finalout

@syncodeindex pg cp
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for Libidn2 (version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}),
an implementation of IDNA2008/TR46 internationalized domain names.

Copyright @copyright{} 2011-2017 Simon Josefsson
@end copying

@dircategory Software libraries
@direntry
* libidn2: (libidn2).	Internationalized domain names (IDNA2008/TR46) processing.
@end direntry

@dircategory Localization
@direntry
* idn2: (libidn2)Invoking idn2.	Internationalized Domain Name (IDNA2008/TR46) conversion.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Libidn2
@subtitle Internationalized Domain Names (IDNA2008/TR46)
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Simon Josefsson
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Libidn2

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::	What is Libidn2?
* Library Functions::	Library functions.
* Examples::		Demonstrate how to use the library.
* Invoking idn2::	Command line interface to the library.

* Interface Index::
* Concept Index::
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

Libidn2 is a free software implementation of IDNA2008.

For technical reference, see RFC 5890
(@uref{https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5890}), RFC 5891
(@uref{https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5891}), RFC 5892
(@uref{https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5892}), RFC 5893
(@uref{https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5893}), and TR46
(@uref{http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr46/}).

Libidn2 uses GNU libunistring
(@uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/libunistring/}) for Unicode
processing and GNU libiconv
(@uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/libiconv/}) for character set
conversion.

Libidn2 is believed to be a complete IDNA2008 and TR46 implementation,
but has yet to be as extensively used as the IDNA2003 Libidn library.

Libidn2 is dual-licensed under LGPLv3|GPLv2, see the file COPYING for
detailed information.

@node Library Functions
@chapter Library Functions
@cindex Library Functions

Below are the interfaces of the Libidn2 library documented.

@section Header file @code{idn2.h}

To use the functions documented in this chapter, you need to include
the file @file{idn2.h} like this:

@example
#include <idn2.h>
@end example

@section Core Functions

When you have the data encoded in UTF-8 form the direct interfaces to
the library are as follows.

@include texi/idn2_lookup_u8.texi
@include texi/idn2_register_u8.texi

@section Locale Functions

As a convenience, the following functions are provided that will
convert the input from the locale encoding format to UTF-8 and
normalize the string using NFC, and then apply the core functions
described earlier.

@include texi/idn2_lookup_ul.texi
@include texi/idn2_register_ul.texi

@section Control Flags

The @code{flags} parameter can take on the following values, or a
bit-wise inclusive or of any subset of the parameters:

@deftypevr {Global flag} {idn2_flags} IDN2_NFC_INPUT
Apply NFC normalization on input.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Global flag} {idn2_flags} IDN2_ALABEL_ROUNDTRIP
Apply additional round-trip conversion of A-label inputs.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Global flag} {idn2_flags} IDN2_TRANSITIONAL
Perform Unicode TR46 transitional processing.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Global flag} {idn2_flags} IDN2_NONTRANSITIONAL
Perform Unicode TR46 non-transitional processing.
@end deftypevr

@section Error Handling

@include texi/idn2_strerror.texi
@include texi/idn2_strerror_name.texi

@section Return Codes

The functions normally return 0 on sucess or a negative error code.

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_OK
Successful return.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_MALLOC
Memory allocation error.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_NO_CODESET
Could not determine locale string encoding format.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_ICONV_FAIL
Could not transcode locale string to UTF-8.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_ENCODING_ERROR
Unicode data encoding error.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_NFC
Error normalizing string.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_PUNYCODE_BAD_INPUT
Punycode invalid input.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_PUNYCODE_BIG_OUTPUT
Punycode output buffer too small.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_PUNYCODE_OVERFLOW
Punycode conversion would overflow.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_TOO_BIG_DOMAIN
Domain name longer than 255 characters.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_TOO_BIG_LABEL
Domain label longer than 63 characters.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_INVALID_ALABEL
Input A-label is not valid.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_UALABEL_MISMATCH
Input A-label and U-label does not match.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_INVALID_FLAGS
Invalid combination of flags.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_NOT_NFC
String is not NFC.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_2HYPHEN
String has forbidden two hyphens.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_HYPHEN_STARTEND
String has forbidden starting/ending hyphen.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_LEADING_COMBINING
String has forbidden leading combining character.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_DISALLOWED
String has disallowed character.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_CONTEXTJ
String has forbidden context-j character.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_CONTEXTJ_NO_RULE
String has context-j character with no rull.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_CONTEXTO
String has forbidden context-o character.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_CONTEXTO_NO_RULE
String has context-o character with no rull.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_UNASSIGNED
String has forbidden unassigned character.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_BIDI
String has forbidden bi-directional properties.
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_DOT_IN_LABEL
Label has forbidden dot (TR46).
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_INVALID_TRANSITIONAL
Label has character forbidden in transitional mode (TR46).
@end deftypevr

@deftypevr {Return code} {idn2_rc} IDN2_INVALID_NONTRANSITIONAL
Label has character forbidden in non-transitional mode (TR46).
@end deftypevr

@section Memory Handling

@include texi/idn2_free.texi

@section Version Check

It is often desirable to check that the version of Libidn2 used is
indeed one which fits all requirements.  Even with binary
compatibility new features may have been introduced but due to problem
with the dynamic linker an old version is actually used.  So you may
want to check that the version is okay right after program startup.

@include texi/idn2_check_version.texi

The normal way to use the function is to put something similar to the
following first in your @code{main}:

@example
  if (!idn2_check_version (IDN2_VERSION))
    @{
      printf ("idn2_check_version() failed:\n"
              "Header file incompatible with shared library.\n");
      exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    @}
@end example

@node Examples
@chapter Examples
@cindex Examples

This chapter contains example code which illustrate how Libidn2 is
used when you write your own application.

@menu
* Lookup::		Example IDNA2008 Lookup domain name operation.
* Register::		Example IDNA2008 Register label operation.
@end menu

@node Lookup
@section Lookup

This example demonstrates how a domain name is processed before it is
lookup in the DNS.

@verbatiminclude lookup.c

@node Register
@section Register

This example demonstrates how a domain label is processed before it is
registered in the DNS.

@verbatiminclude register.c

@node Invoking idn2
@chapter Invoking idn2

@pindex idn2
@cindex invoking @command{idn2}
@cindex command line

@command{idn2} translates internationalized domain names to the
IDNA2008 encoded format, either for lookup or registration.

If strings are specified on the command line, they are used as input
and the computed output is printed to standard output @code{stdout}.
If no strings are specified on the command line, the program read
data, line by line, from the standard input @code{stdin}, and print
the computed output to standard output.  What processing is performed
(e.g., lookup or register) is indicated by options.  If any errors are
encountered, the execution of the applications is aborted.

All strings are expected to be encoded in the preferred charset used
by your locale.  Use @code{--debug} to find out what this charset is.
On POSIX systems you may use the @code{LANG} environment variable to
specify a different locale.

To process a string that starts with @code{-}, for example
@code{-foo}, use @code{--} to signal the end of parameters, as in
@code{idn2 -r -- -foo}.

@section Options
@code{idn2} recognizes these commands:

@verbatim
  -h, --help               Print help and exit

  -V, --version            Print version and exit

  -l, --lookup             Lookup domain name (default)

  -r, --register           Register label

      --debug              Print debugging information

      --quiet              Silent operation
@end verbatim

@section Environment Variables

On POSIX systems the @var{LANG} environment variable can be used to
override the system locale for the command being invoked.  The system
locale may influence what character set is used to decode data (i.e.,
strings on the command line or data read from the standard input
stream), and to encode data to the standard output.  If your system is
set up correctly, however, the application will use the correct locale
and character set automatically.  Example usage:

@example
$ LANG=en_US.UTF-8 idn2
...
@end example

@section Examples

Standard usage, reading input from standard input and disabling
license and usage instructions:

@example
jas@@latte:~$ idn2 --quiet
r@"aksm@"org@aa{}s.se
xn--rksmrgs-5wao1o.se
...
@end example

Reading input from the command line:

@example
jas@@latte:~$ idn2 r@"aksm@"org@aa{}s.se bl@aa{}b@ae{}rgr@o{}d.no
xn--rksmrgs-5wao1o.se
xn--blbrgrd-fxak7p.no
jas@@latte:~$
@end example

Testing the IDNA2008 Register function:

@example
jas@@latte:~$ idn2 --register fu@ss{}ball
xn--fuball-cta
jas@@latte:~$
@end example

@section Troubleshooting

Getting character data encoded right, and making sure Libidn2 use the
same encoding, can be difficult.  The reason for this is that most
systems may encode character data in more than one character encoding,
i.e., using @code{UTF-8} together with @code{ISO-8859-1} or
@code{ISO-2022-JP}.  This problem is likely to continue to exist until
only one character encoding come out as the evolutionary winner, or
(more likely, at least to some extents) forever.

The first step to troubleshooting character encoding problems with
Libidn2 is to use the @samp{--debug} parameter to find out which
character set encoding @samp{idn2} believe your locale uses.

@example
jas@@latte:~$ idn2 --debug --quiet ""
Charset: UTF-8

jas@@latte:~$
@end example

If it prints @code{ANSI_X3.4-1968} (i.e., @code{US-ASCII}), this
indicate you have not configured your locale properly.  To configure
the locale, you can, for example, use @samp{LANG=sv_SE.UTF-8; export
LANG} at a @code{/bin/sh} prompt, to set up your locale for a Swedish
environment using @code{UTF-8} as the encoding.

Sometimes @samp{idn2} appear to be unable to translate from your
system locale into @code{UTF-8} (which is used internally), and you
will get an error message like this:

@example
idn2: lookup: could not convert string to UTF-8
@end example

One explanation is that you didn't install the @samp{iconv} conversion
tools.  You can find it as a standalone library in GNU Libiconv
(@uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/libiconv/}).  On many GNU/Linux
systems, this library is part of the system, but you may have to
install additional packages to be able to use it.

Another explanation is that the error is correct and you are feeding
@samp{idn2} invalid data.  This can happen inadvertently if you are
not careful with the character set encoding you use.  For example, if
your shell run in a @code{ISO-8859-1} environment, and you invoke
@samp{idn2} with the @samp{LANG} environment variable as follows, you
will feed it @code{ISO-8859-1} characters but force it to believe they
are @code{UTF-8}.  Naturally this will lead to an error, unless the
byte sequences happen to be valid @code{UTF-8}.  Note that even if you
don't get an error, the output may be incorrect in this situation,
because @code{ISO-8859-1} and @code{UTF-8} does not in general encode
the same characters as the same byte sequences.

@example
jas@@latte:~$ idn2 --quiet --debug ""
Charset: ISO-8859-1

jas@@latte:~$ LANG=sv_SE.UTF-8 idn2 --debug r@"aksm@"org@aa{}s
Charset: UTF-8
input[0] = 0x72
input[1] = 0xc3
input[2] = 0xa4
input[3] = 0xc3
input[4] = 0xa4
input[5] = 0x6b
input[6] = 0x73
input[7] = 0x6d
input[8] = 0xc3
input[9] = 0xb6
input[10] = 0x72
input[11] = 0x67
input[12] = 0xc3
input[13] = 0xa5
input[14] = 0x73
UCS-4 input[0] = U+0072
UCS-4 input[1] = U+00e4
UCS-4 input[2] = U+00e4
UCS-4 input[3] = U+006b
UCS-4 input[4] = U+0073
UCS-4 input[5] = U+006d
UCS-4 input[6] = U+00f6
UCS-4 input[7] = U+0072
UCS-4 input[8] = U+0067
UCS-4 input[9] = U+00e5
UCS-4 input[10] = U+0073
output[0] = 0x72
output[1] = 0xc3
output[2] = 0xa4
output[3] = 0xc3
output[4] = 0xa4
output[5] = 0x6b
output[6] = 0x73
output[7] = 0x6d
output[8] = 0xc3
output[9] = 0xb6
output[10] = 0x72
output[11] = 0x67
output[12] = 0xc3
output[13] = 0xa5
output[14] = 0x73
UCS-4 output[0] = U+0072
UCS-4 output[1] = U+00e4
UCS-4 output[2] = U+00e4
UCS-4 output[3] = U+006b
UCS-4 output[4] = U+0073
UCS-4 output[5] = U+006d
UCS-4 output[6] = U+00f6
UCS-4 output[7] = U+0072
UCS-4 output[8] = U+0067
UCS-4 output[9] = U+00e5
UCS-4 output[10] = U+0073
xn--rksmrgs-5waap8p
jas@@latte:~$
@end example

The sense moral here is to forget about @samp{LANG} (instead,
configure your system locale properly) unless you know what you are
doing, and if you want to use @samp{LANG}, do it carefully and after
verifying with @samp{--debug} that you get the desired results.

@node Interface Index
@unnumbered Interface Index

@printindex fn

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@bye
